This is the third time;
I hope good luck lies in odd numbers.
Away I go.
They say there is divinity in odd numbers,
either in nativity, chance, or death. Away!
I'll provide you a chain;
and I'll do what I can
to get you a pair of horns.
Away, I say; time wears:
hold up your head, and mince.
How now, Master Brook!
Master Brook,
the matter will be known to-night, or never.
Be you in the park about midnight,
at Herne's oak, and you shall see wonders.
Went you not to her this morning, sir,
as you told me you had appointed?
I went to her, Master Brook,
as you see, like a poor old man:
but I came from her, Master Brook,
like a poor old woman.
That same knave Ford, her husband,
hath the finest mad devil
of jealousy in him,
Master Brook, that ever governed frenzy.
I will tell you: he beat me grievously,
in the shape of a woman;
for in the shape of man, Master Brook,
I fear not Goliath with a weaver's beam;
I am in haste; go along with me:
I'll tell you all.
Since I plucked geese,
played truant and whipped top,
I knew not what 'twas
to be beaten till lately.
Follow me: I'll tell you strange things
of this knave Ford, on whom to-night
I will be revenged,
and I will deliver his wife
into your hand. Follow.
Strange things in hand, Master Brook! Follow.
Come, come;
we'll couch i' the castle-ditch
till we see the light of our fairies.
Remember, son Slender,my daughter.
Ay, forsooth; I have spoke with her
and we have a nay-word how
to know one another:
I come to her in white, and cry 'mum;'
she cries 'budget;'
and by that we know one another.
That's good too:
but what needs either your 'mum'
or her 'budget?'
the white will decipher her well enough.
It hath struck ten o'clock.
The night is dark;
light and spirits will become it well.
Heaven prosper our sport!
No man means evil but the devil,
and we shall know him by his horns.
Let's away; follow me.
Master doctor, my daughter is in green:
when you see your time,
take her by the band,
away with her to the deanery,
and dispatch it quickly.
Go before into the Park:
we two must go together.
I know vat I have to do. Adieu.
Fare you well, sir.
My husband will not rejoice so much
at the abuse of Falstaff
as he will chafe at the doctor's
marrying my daughter:
but 'tis no matter;
better a little chiding
than a great deal of heart-break.
Where is Nan now and her troop of fairies,
and the Welsh devil Hugh?
They are all couched
in a pit hard by Herne's oak,
with obscured lights;
which, at the very instant of Falstaff's
and our meeting,
they will at once display to the night.
That cannot choose but amaze him.
If he be not amazed, he will be mocked;
if he be amazed, he will every way be mocked.
We'll betray him finely.
Against such lewdsters and their lechery
Those that betray them do no treachery.
The hour draws on. To the oak, to the oak!
Trib, trib, fairies; come;
and remember your parts: Trib.
be pold, I pray you; follow me into the pit;
and when I give the watch-'ords,
do as I pid you:
come, come; trib, trib.
The Windsor bell hath struck twelve;
the minute draws on.
Now, the hot-blooded gods assist me!
Remember, Jove, thou wast a bull
for thy Europa;
love set on thy horns.
O powerful love! that,
in some respects, makes a a man a beast,
in some other, a beast a man.
When gods have hot backs,
what shall poor men do?
For me, I am here a Windsor stag;
and the fattest,
I think, i' the forest.
Send me a cool rut-time, Jove,
or who can blame me to piss my tallow?
Who comes here? my doe?
My deer? my male deer?
My doe with the black scut!
Let the sky rain potatoes;
let it thunder to the tune of Green Sleeves,
hail kissing-comfits and snow eringoes;
let there come a tempest of provocation,
I will shelter me here.
Mistress Page is come with me, sweetheart.
Divide me like a bribe buck, each a haunch:
I will keep my sides to myself,
my shoulders for the fellow of this walk,
and my horns I bequeath your husbands.
Am I a woodman, ha?
Speak I like Herne the hunter?
Why, now is Cupid a child of conscience;
he makes restitution.
As I am a true spirit, welcome!
(♪ horns)
Alas, what noise?
Heaven forgive our sins
What should this be?
Away, away!
I think the devil will not have me damned,
lest the oil that's in me
should set hell on fire;
he would never else cross me thus.
Fairies, black, grey, green, and white,
You moonshine revellers and shades of night,
You orphan heirs of fixed destiny,
Attend your office and your quality.
Crier Hobgoblin, make the fairy oyes.
Elves, list your names;
silence, you airy toys.
Cricket, to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap:
Where fires thou find'st unraked
and hearths unswept,
There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry:
Our radiant queen hates sluts and sluttery.
They are fairies;
he that speaks to them shall die:
I'll wink and couch:
no man their works must eye.
Where's Bede?
Here!
Go you, and where you find a maid
That, ere she sleep,
has thrice her prayers said,
Raise up the organs of her fantasy;
Sleep she as sound as careless infancy:
But those as sleep and think not on their sins,
Pinch them, arms, legs, backs,
shoulders, sides and shins.
Where's Pede?
Here!
Go you and see where Brokers sleep.
and foxide servants with their mace.
Go lay the proctors in the streets,
and pinch the lousy servants face,
spare none of these when there abed,
but such whose nose looks blue and red.
About, about;
Search Windsor Castle,
elves, within and out:
Strew good luck, ouphes, on every sacred room:
That it may stand till the perpetual doom,
In state as wholesome as in state 'tis fit,
Worthy the owner, and the owner it.
Away; disperse: but till 'tis one o'clock,
Our dance of custom round about the oak
Of Herne the hunter, let us not forget.
Pray you, lock hand in hand;
yourselves in order set
And twenty glow-worms shall our lanterns be,
To guide our measure round about the tree.
But, stay; I smell a man of middle-earth.
Heavens defend me from that Welsh fairy,
lest he transform me to a piece of cheese!
Vile worm, thou wast o'erlook'd
even in thy birth.
With trial-fire touch me his finger-end:
If he be chaste, the flame will back descend
And turn him to no pain; but if he start,
It is the flesh of a corrupted heart.
A trial, come.
Come, will this wood take fire?
Oh, Oh, Oh!
Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire!
About him, fairies; sing a scornful rhyme;
And, as you trip,
still pinch him to your time.
(♪ song)
Fie on sinful fantasy!
Fie on lust and luxury!
Lust is but a bloody fire,
Kindled with unchaste desire,
Fed in heart, whose flames aspire
As thoughts do blow them, higher and higher.
Pinch him, fairies, mutually;
Pinch him for his villany;
Pinch him, and burn him, and turn him about,
Till candles and starlight and moonshine be out.
Till candles and starlight and moonshine be out. ♪
(♪ music continues)
(♪horns)
God save you, Sir John Falstaff.
Nay, do not fly;
I think we have watch'd you now
Will none but Herne the hunter serve your turn?
I pray you, come, hold up the jest no higher
Now, good Sir John, how like you Windsor wives?
See you these, husband?
do not these fair yokes
Become the forest better than the town?
Now, sir, who's a cuckold now?
Master Brook,
Falstaff's a knave, a cuckoldly knave;
here are his horns, Master Brook:
and, Master Brook,
he hath enjoyed nothing of Ford's
but his buck-basket,
his cudgel, and twenty pounds of money,
which must be paid to Master Brook;
his horses are arrested fo rit, Master Brook.
Sir John, we have had ill luck; we could never meet.
I will never take you for my love again;
but I will always count you my deer.
I do begin to perceive that I am made an ass.
Ay, and an ox too:
both the proofs are extant.
And these are not fairies?
(laughing)
I was three or four times in the thought
they were not fairies:
and yet the guiltiness of my mind,
the sudden surprise of my powers,
drove the grossness of the foppery
into a received belief,
in despite of the teeth
of all rhyme and reason,
that they were fairies.
See now how wit may be made
a Jack-a-Lent,
when 'tis upon ill employment!
Sir John Falstaff, serve Got,
and leave your desires,
and fairies will not pinse you.
Well said, fairy Hugh.
And leave your jealousies too, I pray you.
I will never mistrust my wife again
till thou art able to woo her in good English.
Have I laid my brain in the sun and dried it,
that it wants matter
to prevent so gross o'erreaching as this?
Am I ridden with a Welsh goat too?
shall I have a coxcomb of frize?
'Tis time I were choked
with a piece of toasted cheese.
Seese is not good to give putter;
your belly is all putter.
'Seese' and 'putter'!
have I lived to stand at the taunt
of one that makes fritters of English?
This is enough to be the decay
of lust and late-walking through the realm.
Why Sir John, do you think,
though we would have thrust virtue
out of our hearts by the head and shoulders
and have given ourselves
without scruple to hell,
that ever the devil
could have made you our delight?
What, a hodge-pudding? a bag of flax?
A puffed man?
Old, cold, withered and of intolerable entrails?
And one that is as slanderous as Satan?
And as poor as Job?
And as wicked as his wife?
And given to fornications,
and to taverns and sack
and wine and metheglins,
and to drinkings and
swearings and starings, pribbles and prabbles?
Well, I am your theme:
you have the start of me;
I am dejected;
I am not able to answer the Welsh flannel;
ignorance itself is a plummet o'er me:
use me as you will.
Marry, sir, we'll bring you to Windsor,
to one Master Brook,
that you have cozened of money,
to whom you should have been a pander:
over and above that you have suffered,
I think to repay that money
will be a biting affliction.
Nay good husband.
Let that go to make amends. Forget that sum.
Then we'll all be friends.
Yet be cheerful, knight:
thou shalt eat a posset to-night at my house;
where I will desire thee to laugh at my wife,
that now laughs at thee:
tell her Master Slender hath married her daughter.
Doctors doubt that:
if Anne Page be my daughter,
she is, by this, Doctor Caius' wife.
Whoa ho! ho, father Page!
Son, how now! how now, son!
have you dispatched?
Dispatched!
I'll make the best in Gloucestershire know on't;
would I were hanged, la, else.
Of what, son?
I came yonder at Eton
to marry Mistress Anne Page,
and she's a great lubberly boy.
If it had not been i' the church,
I would have swinged him,
or he should have swinged me.
If I did not think it had been Anne Page,
would I might never stir!
--and 'tis a postmaster's boy.
Upon my life, then, you took the wrong.
What need you tell me that?
I think so, when I took a boy for a girl.
If I had been married to him,
for all he was in woman's apparel,
I would not have had him.
Why, this is your own folly.
Did not I tell you how
you should know my daughter by her garments?
I went to her in white, and cried 'mum,'
and she cried 'budget,'
as Anne and I had appointed;
and yet it was not Anne, but a postmaster's boy.
Good George, be not angry:
I knew of your purpose;
turned my daughter into green;
and, indeed, she is now with the doctor
at the deanery, and there married.
Vere is Mistress Page?
By gar, I am cozened:
I ha' married un garcon, a boy;
un paysan, by gar, a boy;
it is not Anne Page: by gar, I am cozened.
Why, did you take her in green?
Ay, by gar, and 'tis a garson, jacque boy:
by gar, I'll raise all Windsor.
This is strange. Who hath got the right Anne?
My heart misgives me: here comes Master Fenton.
How now, Master Fenton!
Pardon, good father! good my mother, pardon!
Now, mistress,
how chance you went not with Master Slender?
Why went you not with master doctor, maid?
You do amaze her: hear the truth of it.
You would have married her most shamefully,
Where there was no proportion held in love.
The truth is, she and I,
long since contracted,
Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us.
The offence is holy that she hath committed;
And this deceit loses the name of craft,
Of disobedience, or unduteous title,
Since therein she doth evitate and shun
A thousand irreligious cursed hours,
Which forced marriage
would have brought upon her.
Stand not amazed; here is no remedy:
In love the heavens themselves
do guide the state;
Money buys lands, and wives are sold by fate.
I am glad,
though you have ta'en a special stand to strike at me,
that your arrow hath glanced.
Well, what remedy?
Fenton, heaven give thee joy!
What cannot be eschew'd must be embraced.
When night-dogs run,
all sorts of deer are chased.
Well, I will muse no further.
Master Fenton,
Heaven give you many, many merry days!
I also will dance and eat plums at your wedding.
Good husband, let us every one go home,
And laugh this sport o'er by a country fire;
Sir John and all.
Let it be so. Sir John,
To Master Brook you yet shall keep your word
For he tonight shall lie with Mistress Ford.
(♪singing)